docs/docker.md, before:

# Docker

## Prerequisites
* Docker must be installed and running on your system.
* Create a folder to store big models & intermediate files (ex. /llama/models)

## Images
We have three Docker images available for this project:

1. `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full`: This image includes both the main executable file and the tools to convert LLaMA models into ggml and convert into 4-bit quantization. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`, `linux/s390x`)
2. `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light`: This image only includes the main executable file. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`, `linux/s390x`)
3. `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server`: This image only includes the server executable file. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`, `linux/s390x`)

Additionally, there the following images, similar to the above:

- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-cuda`: Same as `full` but compiled with CUDA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-cuda`: Same as `light` but compiled with CUDA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-cuda`: Same as `server` but compiled with CUDA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-rocm`: Same as `full` but compiled with ROCm support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-rocm`: Same as `light` but compiled with ROCm support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-rocm`: Same as `server` but compiled with ROCm support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-musa`: Same as `full` but compiled with MUSA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-musa`: Same as `light` but compiled with MUSA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-musa`: Same as `server` but compiled with MUSA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-intel`: Same as `full` but compiled with SYCL support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-intel`: Same as `light` but compiled with SYCL support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-intel`: Same as `server` but compiled with SYCL support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-vulkan`: Same as `full` but compiled with Vulkan support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-vulkan`: Same as `light` but compiled with Vulkan support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-vulkan`: Same as `server` but compiled with Vulkan support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)

The GPU enabled images are not currently tested by CI beyond being built. They are not built with any variation from the ones in the Dockerfiles defined in [.devops/](../.devops/) and the GitHub Action defined in [.github/workflows/docker.yml](../.github/workflows/docker.yml). If you need different settings (for example, a different CUDA, ROCm or MUSA library, you'll need to build the images locally for now).

## Usage

The easiest way to download the models, convert them to ggml and optimize them is with the --all-in-one command which includes the full docker image.

Replace `/path/to/models` below with the actual path where you downloaded the models.

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full --all-in-one "/models/" 7B
```

On completion, you are ready to play!

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full --run -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512
```

or with a light image:

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512
```

or with a server image:

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models -p 8080:8080 ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0 -n 512
```

## Docker With CUDA

Assuming one has the [nvidia-container-toolkit](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-container-toolkit) properly installed on Linux, or is using a GPU enabled cloud, `cuBLAS` should be accessible inside the container.

## Building Docker locally

```bash
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:full-cuda --target full -f .devops/cuda.Dockerfile .
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:light-cuda --target light -f .devops/cuda.Dockerfile .
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:server-cuda --target server -f .devops/cuda.Dockerfile .
```

You may want to pass in some different `ARGS`, depending on the CUDA environment supported by your container host, as well as the GPU architecture.

The defaults are:

- `CUDA_VERSION` set to `12.4.0`
- `CUDA_DOCKER_ARCH` set to the cmake build default, which includes all the supported architectures

The resulting images, are essentially the same as the non-CUDA images:

1. `local/llama.cpp:full-cuda`: This image includes both the main executable file and the tools to convert LLaMA models into ggml and convert into 4-bit quantization.
2. `local/llama.cpp:light-cuda`: This image only includes the main executable file.
3. `local/llama.cpp:server-cuda`: This image only includes the server executable file.

## Usage

After building locally, Usage is similar to the non-CUDA examples, but you'll need to add the `--gpus` flag. You will also want to use the `--n-gpu-layers` flag.

```bash
docker run --gpus all -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:full-cuda --run -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
docker run --gpus all -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:light-cuda -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
docker run --gpus all -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:server-cuda -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0 -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
```

## Docker With MUSA

Assuming one has the [mt-container-toolkit](https://developer.mthreads.com/musa/native) properly installed on Linux, `muBLAS` should be accessible inside the container.

## Building Docker locally

```bash
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:full-musa --target full -f .devops/musa.Dockerfile .
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:light-musa --target light -f .devops/musa.Dockerfile .
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:server-musa --target server -f .devops/musa.Dockerfile .
```

You may want to pass in some different `ARGS`, depending on the MUSA environment supported by your container host, as well as the GPU architecture.

The defaults are:

- `MUSA_VERSION` set to `rc4.3.0`

The resulting images, are essentially the same as the non-MUSA images:

1. `local/llama.cpp:full-musa`: This image includes both the main executable file and the tools to convert LLaMA models into ggml and convert into 4-bit quantization.
2. `local/llama.cpp:light-musa`: This image only includes the main executable file.
3. `local/llama.cpp:server-musa`: This image only includes the server executable file.

## Usage

After building locally, Usage is similar to the non-MUSA examples, but you'll need to set `mthreads` as default Docker runtime. This can be done by executing `(cd /usr/bin/musa && sudo ./docker setup $PWD)` and verifying the changes by executing `docker info | grep mthreads` on the host machine. You will also want to use the `--n-gpu-layers` flag.

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:full-musa --run -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:light-musa -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:server-musa -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0 -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
```

Commit message:

CLI: fixed adding cli and completion into docker containers, improved docs

docs/docker.md, after:

# Docker

## Prerequisites
* Docker must be installed and running on your system.
* Create a folder to store big models & intermediate files (ex. /llama/models)

## Images
We have three Docker images available for this project:

1. `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full`: This image includes both the `llama-cli` and `llama-completion` executables and the tools to convert LLaMA models into ggml and convert into 4-bit quantization. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`, `linux/s390x`)
2. `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light`: This image only includes the `llama-cli` and `llama-completion` executables. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`, `linux/s390x`)
3. `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server`: This image only includes the `llama-server` executable. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`, `linux/s390x`)

Additionally, there the following images, similar to the above:

- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-cuda`: Same as `full` but compiled with CUDA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-cuda`: Same as `light` but compiled with CUDA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-cuda`: Same as `server` but compiled with CUDA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-rocm`: Same as `full` but compiled with ROCm support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-rocm`: Same as `light` but compiled with ROCm support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-rocm`: Same as `server` but compiled with ROCm support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`, `linux/arm64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-musa`: Same as `full` but compiled with MUSA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-musa`: Same as `light` but compiled with MUSA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-musa`: Same as `server` but compiled with MUSA support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-intel`: Same as `full` but compiled with SYCL support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-intel`: Same as `light` but compiled with SYCL support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-intel`: Same as `server` but compiled with SYCL support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full-vulkan`: Same as `full` but compiled with Vulkan support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light-vulkan`: Same as `light` but compiled with Vulkan support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)
- `ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server-vulkan`: Same as `server` but compiled with Vulkan support. (platforms: `linux/amd64`)

The GPU enabled images are not currently tested by CI beyond being built. They are not built with any variation from the ones in the Dockerfiles defined in [.devops/](../.devops/) and the GitHub Action defined in [.github/workflows/docker.yml](../.github/workflows/docker.yml). If you need different settings (for example, a different CUDA, ROCm or MUSA library, you'll need to build the images locally for now).

## Usage

The easiest way to download the models, convert them to ggml and optimize them is with the --all-in-one command which includes the full docker image.

Replace `/path/to/models` below with the actual path where you downloaded the models.

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full --all-in-one "/models/" 7B
```

On completion, you are ready to play!

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full --entrypoint /app/llama-cli --run -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:full --entrypoint /app/llama-completion --run -m /models/32B/ggml-model-q8_0.gguf -no-cnv -p "Building a mobile app can be done in 15 steps:" -n 512
```

or with a light image:

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light --entrypoint /app/llama-cli -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:light --entrypoint /app/llama-completion -m /models/32B/ggml-model-q8_0.gguf -no-cnv -p "Building a mobile app can be done in 15 steps:" -n 512
```

or with a server image:

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models -p 8080:8080 ghcr.io/ggml-org/llama.cpp:server -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0 -n 512
```

In the above examples, `--entrypoint /app/llama-cli` is specified for clarity, but you can safely omit it since it's the default entrypoint in the container.

## Docker With CUDA

Assuming one has the [nvidia-container-toolkit](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-container-toolkit) properly installed on Linux, or is using a GPU enabled cloud, `cuBLAS` should be accessible inside the container.

## Building Docker locally

```bash
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:full-cuda --target full -f .devops/cuda.Dockerfile .
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:light-cuda --target light -f .devops/cuda.Dockerfile .
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:server-cuda --target server -f .devops/cuda.Dockerfile .
```

You may want to pass in some different `ARGS`, depending on the CUDA environment supported by your container host, as well as the GPU architecture.

The defaults are:

- `CUDA_VERSION` set to `12.4.0`
- `CUDA_DOCKER_ARCH` set to the cmake build default, which includes all the supported architectures

The resulting images, are essentially the same as the non-CUDA images:

1. `local/llama.cpp:full-cuda`: This image includes both the `llama-cli` and `llama-completion` executables and the tools to convert LLaMA models into ggml and convert into 4-bit quantization.
2. `local/llama.cpp:light-cuda`: This image only includes the `llama-cli` and `llama-completion` executables.
3. `local/llama.cpp:server-cuda`: This image only includes the `llama-server` executable.

## Usage

After building locally, Usage is similar to the non-CUDA examples, but you'll need to add the `--gpus` flag. You will also want to use the `--n-gpu-layers` flag.

```bash
docker run --gpus all -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:full-cuda --run -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
docker run --gpus all -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:light-cuda -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
docker run --gpus all -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:server-cuda -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0 -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
```

## Docker With MUSA

Assuming one has the [mt-container-toolkit](https://developer.mthreads.com/musa/native) properly installed on Linux, `muBLAS` should be accessible inside the container.

## Building Docker locally

```bash
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:full-musa --target full -f .devops/musa.Dockerfile .
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:light-musa --target light -f .devops/musa.Dockerfile .
docker build -t local/llama.cpp:server-musa --target server -f .devops/musa.Dockerfile .
```

You may want to pass in some different `ARGS`, depending on the MUSA environment supported by your container host, as well as the GPU architecture.

The defaults are:

- `MUSA_VERSION` set to `rc4.3.0`

The resulting images, are essentially the same as the non-MUSA images:

1. `local/llama.cpp:full-musa`: This image includes both the `llama-cli` and `llama-completion` executables and the tools to convert LLaMA models into ggml and convert into 4-bit quantization.
2. `local/llama.cpp:light-musa`: This image only includes the `llama-cli` and `llama-completion` executables.
3. `local/llama.cpp:server-musa`: This image only includes the `llama-server` executable.

## Usage

After building locally, Usage is similar to the non-MUSA examples, but you'll need to set `mthreads` as default Docker runtime. This can be done by executing `(cd /usr/bin/musa && sudo ./docker setup $PWD)` and verifying the changes by executing `docker info | grep mthreads` on the host machine. You will also want to use the `--n-gpu-layers` flag.

```bash
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:full-musa --run -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:light-musa -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf -p "Building a website can be done in 10 simple steps:" -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
docker run -v /path/to/models:/models local/llama.cpp:server-musa -m /models/7B/ggml-model-q4_0.gguf --port 8080 --host 0.0.0.0 -n 512 --n-gpu-layers 1
```
